---
title: Privacy Policy
---

## What is this Privacy Policy for?

This privacy policy is for this website [https://0ink.net/](https://www.0ink.net/)
and its sub-domains and governs the privacy of its users who choose to
use it. The policy sets out the different areas where user privacy is
concerned and outlines the obligations & requirements of the users,
the website and website owners. Furthermore the way this website
processes, stores and protects user data and information will also be
detailed within this policy.

## The Website

This website and its owners take a proactive approach to user privacy
and ensure the necessary steps are taken to protect the privacy of its
users throughout their visiting experience. This website complies to
all relevant laws and requirements for user privacy.

#### Contact & Communication

Users contacting this website and/or its owners do so at their own
discretion and provide any such personal details requested at their
own risk. Your personal information is kept private and stored
securely until a time it is no longer required or has no use, as
detailed in the Data Protection Act 1998. Every effort has been made
to ensure a safe and secure form to email submission process but
advise users using such form to email processes that they do so at
their own risk.  

## External Links

Although this website only looks to include quality, safe and relevant
external links, users are advised adopt a policy of caution before
clicking any external web links mentioned throughout this website.
(External links are clickable text / banner / image links to other
websites, similar to; [Folded Book Art](http://www.craftykingsboutique.co.uk/ "Folded Book Art")
or [Used Model Trains For Sale](http://www.kingstrains.co.uk/articles/Used-Model-Trains-For-Sale "Used model trains for sale").)

The owners of this website cannot guarantee or verify the contents of
any externally linked website despite their best efforts. Users should
therefore note they click on external links at their own risk and this
website and its owners cannot be held liable for any damages or
implications caused by visiting any external links mentioned.

## Social Media Platforms

Communication, engagement and actions taken through external social
media platforms that this website and its owners participate on are
custom to the terms and conditions as well as the privacy policies
held with each social media platform respectively.

Users are advised to use social media platforms wisely and communicate
/ engage upon them with due care and caution in regard to their own
privacy and personal details. This website nor its owners will ever
ask for personal or sensitive information through social media
platforms and encourage users wishing to discuss sensitive details to
contact them through primary communication channels such as by
telephone or email.

This website may use social sharing buttons which help share web
content directly from web pages to the social media platform in
question. Users are advised before using such social sharing buttons
that they do so at their own discretion and note that the social media
platform may track and save your request to share a web page
respectively through your social media platform account.
