---
ID: "1080"
post_author: "2"
post_date: "2017-04-12 16:12:51"
post_date_gmt: "0000-00-00 00:00:00"
post_title: Telegram
post_excerpt: ""
post_status: draft
comment_status: open
ping_status: open
post_password: ""
post_name: ""
to_ping: ""
pinged: ""
post_modified: "2017-04-12 16:12:51"
post_modified_gmt: "2017-04-12 16:12:51"
post_content_filtered: ""
post_parent: "0"
guid: https://0ink.net/?p=1080
menu_order: "0"
post_type: post
post_mime_type: ""
comment_count: "0"
title: Telegram
date: 2017-04-12
tags: cloud, desktop, linux, privacy, storage, windows
revised: 2021-12-22
---


[Telegram](https://telegram.org/) is a messenger designed to overcome
the limitations of other messengers like WhatsApp or similar ones. It
is different and better than other messengers on more than one level.
A few of the important features that make it stand out among other
messengers are:

* *Open API*. This enables the users to develop their own versions of
  the telegram.
* *Open Protocol*. This protocol is highly secure and will protect
  important messages from hackers
* *Free*. As is freedom as well as subscription. There will be no ads
  and the developers intend to keep it that way forever.
* *It has unlimited cloud storage*. There is no limit on the size of
  media or chats.

Available on all devices like tablets, smartphones, desktop ( Mac,
Windows, and Linux as well) and there is web version too...
Telegram is not here for profits but instead to provide users an
alternative to all those other messengers which don' value privacy. We
will now look at setting up of the desktop telegram on Linux. 

I used arch with deepin desktop, but telegram should work in any Linux
based PC.

First, Visit the telegram website and choose telegram for PC/Mac/Linux.

Then, the website should automatically detect your Linux and show you
the download link. Or you can select the one that suits your PC. Keep
in mind the CPU architecture 32 bit or 64 bit. Click on Download.

From [linuxandubuntu](http://www.linuxandubuntu.com/home/telegram-messenger-on-linux-telegram-linux)

