---
title: libnss-db HOWTO
date: "2023-09-01"
---
This mini-howto illustrate how to use  `libnss-db` on a [Ubuntu][ubuntu]
Linux system.

Other installations should work to after adjusting package names and directory paths.

I myself use as a "serverless" lightweight user directory.  Essentially, I mount the
db directory and the home directory from an NFS server.

# Package installation

Install the following packages:

```bash
apt install -y libnss-db make

```

This creates a directory `/var/lib/misc` in [Ubuntu][ubuntu].  Other distributions
this may be in `/var/db`.

# Preparing nss-db data directory

I like to keep a separate set of users in the `db` files. For that, create a
directory  `/var/lib/misc/etc`.  This will contain the additional users and groups.

```bash
for f in passwd group shadow
do
  cp -av /etc/$f /var/lib/misc/etc/$f
  >  /var/lib/misc/etc/$f
done
```

This creates, `passwd`, `group`, and `shadow` files.  **NOTE:** `gshadow`
is unsupported.  This is only relevant if you are using passwords to
control user group changes.

Because in this scenario, we are using flat files (i.e. `/etc/passwd` vs.
`/var/lib/misc/passwd.db`) and db files, we want to not have uid/gid overlaps.

Copy `/etc/login.defs` to `/var/lib/misc/etc/login.defs` and 
change UID_MIN,UID_MAX,GID_MIN,GID_MAX to a different space (so as not 
to overlap with the flatfiles spaces).

When users are created with the `useradd` command, you can pass the
`--prefix /var/lib/misc` argument, so then it would create users in
the `/var/lib/misc/etc` directory (ignoring `/etc`) and would get
defaults from `/var/lib/misc/etc/login.defs` (instead of `/etc/login.defs`).

For `/home` directories to be created properly I create the symlink:

```bash
ln -s /home /var/lib/misc/home
```

I also like to add `sudoers` configuration to the `/var/lib/misc` directory (so
it can be shared via NFS)

```bash
cp -av /etc/sudoers.d $dbdir
```

# Moving nss-db data

If you are storing nss-db in a different location, you can use a `mount --bind`
to make it available in `/var/lib/misc`.  This can be configured on `/etc/fstab`
as follows:

```bash
# /etc/fstab
/mount/point/dir /var/lib/misc none defaults,bind 0 0
```

# Configuring nss-db

In `/var/lib/misc` there is a `Makefile` that is used to create the relevant
`db` files.  To control how this you can configure things in
`/etc/default/libnss-db`:

```
# /etc/default/libnss-db
# settings for libnss-db

# Directory where the databases are kept
VAR_DB = /var/lib/misc
# Location of files
ETC = $(VAR_DB)/etc

# Databases to generate
DBS = passwd group shadow

# Programs used
AWK = awk
MAKEDB = makedb --quiet
```

You must also add the `db` setting to the `/etc/nsswitch.conf` lines
for `passwd`, `group` and `shadow`.

```bash
# Configure nsswitch.conf
sed -i~ \
        -e 's/^\(passwd:[ \t]*\).*$/\1files systemd db/' \
        -e 's/^\(group:[ \t]*\).*$/\1files systemd db/' \
        -e 's/^\(shadow:[ \t]*\).*$/\1files db/' \
        /etc/nsswitch.conf
```

This is not strictly part of nss-db, but I like to add to `/etc/sudoers`
the line:

```
@includedir /var/lib/misc/sudoers.d
```

From then on, adding, modifying and removing users/groups should be done
on the files in `/var/lib/misc/etc`.  Afterwards, use `make` in `/var/lib/misc`
to recrate `db` files.

For convenience I created a script in `/usr/local/bin` named `nssdb`:

```bash
#!/bin/sh
#
# NSSDB command
#
nssdb_dir=/var/lib/misc
nssdb_opts="--prefix $nssdb_dir"
extra_group_add_opts="--key GID_MIN=13000 --key GID_MAX=13999"

if [ $# -eq 0 ] ; then
  cat <<-_EOF_
        Usage: $0 useradd|userdel|usermod|groupadd|groupdel|groupmod [options]
        _EOF_
  exit 1
fi

case "$1" in
  useradd|userdel|usermod|groupdel|groupmod)
    op="$1" ; shift
    ;;
  groupadd)
    op="$1" ; shift
    nssdb_opts="$nssdb_opts $extra_group_add_opts"
    ;;
  *) echo "$1: Unknown sub-command" ; exit 1
esac

"$op" $nssdb_opts "$@" && ( cd $nssdb_dir && make )
```

What it does is that you can run:

- `nssdb useradd`
- `nssdb usermod`
- `nssdb userdel`
- `nssdb groupadd`
- `nssdb groupmod`
- `nssdb groupdel`

This will run the specified commands but with `--prefix` option so these
will modify files in `/var/lib/misc` and the `Makefile` called accordingly.

Note the following commands can not be supported:

- `chfn`: does not support `--prefix` or `--root` options.
- `chsh`, `passwd`, `newusers` : only support `--root` which requires `root`
  priviledges.

  [ubuntu]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ubuntu

