---
title: QNAP Snapshots
tags: configuration, directory, linux
---
I wrote a small tool to access QNAP snapshots from the Linux command line.

Pre-requistes:

- Snapshots have to be enabled
- You need a `/share/netcfg` containing the file:
  - In my case, I set this share as `read-only` with `root-squash`.
  - `admin.yaml' : contains the private/public keys and the configuration
    of the forced command.  For access control, it is only readable
    to group and the file is owned by the UNIX group that can do snapshot
    operations.
  - `registry.yaml` : this is optional if you are changing the `admin` username.

Afterwards run:

- `install_key.sh` __server-name__

This installs the public key into the `authorized keys`.  You will need
ssh access for this to work.

You need to do this on all the QNAP servers that offer snapshots.

Copy `qsnap` to somewhere in your path.

# Usage

## Listing snapshots

```bash
qsnap
```

List snapshots for the current directory

``bash
qsnap ls file-path
``

List snapshots for the given `file-path`.  `file-path` can be provided
multiple times.

## Reading snapshot files

```bash
qsnap cat [--snap=snapid] file1 [file2 file3 ...]
```

Would display the given file(s) from the snapshot.  If `snapid` is not
specified will use the latest available snapshot.

## Dumping snapshots

``bash
qsnap tar [--snap=snapid] [options] path
```

Will dump the given `path` as a tarball.  If `snapid` is not
specified will use the latest available snapshot.

The `path` can be either a file or directory.

Additional options:

- `--base64` : Data will be dumped using MIME Base64 encoding
- '--no-compress' : Default is to compress.  This disables compression
- '-v' : Pass `v` flag to `tar` command.

All this can be found on [github](https://github.com/alejandroliu/0ink.net/blob/main/snippets/2023/qsnap).
