---
ID: "70"
post_author: "2"
post_date: "2013-05-13 09:26:46"
post_date_gmt: "2013-05-13 09:26:46"
post_title: Bash Tips
post_excerpt: ""
post_status: publish
comment_status: open
ping_status: closed
post_password: ""
post_name: bash-tips
to_ping: ""
pinged: ""
post_modified: "2013-05-13 09:26:46"
post_modified_gmt: "2013-05-13 09:26:46"
post_content_filtered: ""
post_parent: "0"
guid: http://s12.pw/wp/?p=70
menu_order: "0"
post_type: post
post_mime_type: ""
comment_count: "0"
title: Bash Tips
...
---

Some bash one-liners:

<pre><code>echo ${!X*}
</code></pre>

Will print all the names of variables whos name starts with <code>X</code>.

To output the contents of a variable so it can be parsed by<br />
bash

<pre><code>declare -p VARNAME
</code></pre>

<h1>Pattern Matching</h1>

<pre><code>Operator: ${foo#t*is}
</code></pre>

Function: deletes the shortest possible match from the left

<pre><code>Operator: ${foo##t*is}
</code></pre>

Function: deletes the longest possible match from the left

<pre><code>Operator: ${foo%t*st}
</code></pre>

Function: deletes the shortest possible match from the right

<pre><code>Operator: ${foo%%t*st}
</code></pre>

Function: deletes the longest possible match from the right

MNEMONIC: The # key is on the left side of the $ key and operates from the left. The % key is on the right of the $ key and operates from the right.

<h1>Substitution</h1>

<pre><code>Operator: ${foo:-bar}
</code></pre>

Function: If $foo exists and is not null, return $foo. If it doesn't exist or is null, return bar.

<pre><code>Operator: ${foo:=bar}
</code></pre>

Function: If $foo exists and is not null, return $foo. If it doesn't exist or is null, set $foo to bar and return bar.

<pre><code>Operator: ${foo:+bar}
</code></pre>

Function: If $foo exists and is not null, return bar. If it doesn't exist or is null, return a null.

<pre><code>Operator: ${foo:?"error message"}
</code></pre>

Function: If $foo exists and isn't null, return its value. If it doesn't exist or is null, print the error message. If no error message is given, it prints parameter null or not set. In a non-interactive shell, this aborts the current script. In an interactive shell, this simply prints the error message.

<h1>$$ for Subshell</h1>

When running a sub-shell in <code>bash</code> the <code>$$</code> construct still returns the process id of the main shell.  Use the following construct to determine the correct IP address:

<pre><code>mypid=$(sh -c 'echo $$PPID')
</code></pre>

Yes, it looks <em>nasty</em>.

