---
title: Storing secrets in git
tags: encryption, git, installation
---

So I gave into the temptation to store "secret" data into
a [git][git] repository.  Of course, to keep things
safer, I chose to use an encryption tool.  So I tested:

- [git-crypt][gc]
- [git-secret][gs]

# git-secret

So, I tested [git-secret][gs].  It seems to work but was in my
opinion cumbersome.

Furthermore, the version I tested, which
was the one from the [void][void] has a bug whereby adding
files for encryption would update the `.gitignore` file
but would forget to put an EOL at the end of the file.

The main issue I have is that you need to explicitly issue
the command:

```
git-secret hide

```

To hide files.  Alternatively you can include this in your
pre-commit hook, but that brings its own issues along.

Overall it was not the best experience.

# git-crypt

At the end I opted for [git-crypt][gc], which is more seamless
and requires less user interaction for it to work.

## git-crypt mini howto

I installed [git-crypt][gc] using my distro package installation
command.

Initialize an existing git repo and export encryption key:

```
cd repo
git-crypt init
git-crypt export /path/to/key

```

The exported key now needs to be shared between all the repo
users.  For example can be saved into a secret variable in
the CI/CD pipeline system.

Select the files that need to be protected by creating
a `.gitattributes` file:

```
secretfile filter=git-crypt diff=git-crypt
*.key filter=git-crypt diff=git-crypt
secretdir/** filter=git-crypt diff=git-crypt

```

Like a `.gitignore` file, it can match wildcards and should
be checked into the repository.  Make sure you don't accidentally
encrypt the `.gitattributes` file itself (or other git files like
`.gitignore` or `.gitmodules`).

**NOTE** _Make sure your `.gitattributes` rules are in place before
you add sensitive files, or those files won't be encrypted!_

After cloning a repository with encrypted files, unlock with
the secret key:

```
git-crypt unlock /path/to/key

```

That's all you need to do - after [git-crypt][gc] is set up (either
with `git-crypt init` or `git-crypt unlock`), you can use git
normally - encryption and decryption happen transparently.



[git]: https://git-scm.com/
[gc]: https://github.com/AGWA/git-crypt
[gs]: https://git-secret.io/
[void]: https://voidlinux.org/
