---
title: Y2K38 filesystems
date: "2024-11-07"
author: alex
---
[toc]
***
This is a small note...

This happens to me some times.  I mount a filesystem and I get the warning:

```
xfs filesystem being mounted at /mntimg supports timestamps until 2038-01-19 (0x7fffffff)
```

This has to do with the __year 2038__ problem.

# Background

The year 2038 problem (also known as **Y2038**, **Y2K38**, **Y2K38 superbug**
or the **Epochalypse**) is a time computing problem that leaves some computer systems
unable to represent times after 03:14:07 UTC on 19 January 2038.

The problem exists in systems which measure Unix time -- the number of seconds
elapsed since the __Unix epoch__ (00:00:00 UTC on 1 January 1970) -- and store it in a
signed 32-bit integer. The data type is only capable of representing integers between
-(2^^31^^) and 2^^31^^ − 1, meaning the latest time that can be properly encoded
is 2^^31^^ − 1 seconds after epoch (03:14:07 UTC on 19 January 2038). Attempting to
increment to the following second (03:14:08) will cause the integer to overflow,
setting its value to -(2^^31^^) which systems will interpret as 2^^31^^ seconds
before epoch (20:45:52 UTC on 13 December 1901). The problem is similar in nature
to the year 2000 problem, the difference being the Year 2000 problem had to do with
base 10 numbers, whereas the Year 2038 problem involves base 2 numbers.

See [wikipedia article][wikipedia]

# What to do

Of course, you can just ignore it, it is merely a warning and not an error.  If
you want to keep your logs clean of these, you can update your filesystems
or just create new ones.  Ironically, this only affects UNIX style
filesystems such as [xfs][xfs] and [ext4][ext4].  It does *not* affect
other filesystems like [vfat][vfat] used by MSDOS.

For [xfs][xfs] and [ext4][ext4], the Linux Kernel introduced patches back
in version 5.10 circa 2021 to address these.

# xfs

For `xfs`, when you createa new file system it should default now to using
64 bit timestamps.  Otherwise you can force it with this command:

```
mkfs.xfs -m bigtime=1 device
```

If you have existing file systems you can convert them with this process:

1. Run `xfs_repair -n` to make sure that there are no errors
2. Run:
   ```
   xfs_amdin -O bigtime=1 device
   ```

# ext4 

Check if the filesystem needs to be upgraded:

``
$ tune2fs -l device | grep "Inode size:"
Inode size:           128
``

Where an inode size of `128` is insufficient beyond 2038 and an inode size of
`256` is what you want.

Current version of `mkfs` will create a filesystem with the appropriate inode
size.  Otherwise, you can use the command with the right inode size:

```
mkfs.ext4 -I 256 device
```

Unfortunately, there is no safe way to change an existing filesystem.  The
current version of `e2fsprogs` does accept a `-I 256` option, however,
the functionality is disabled when `flex_bg` (which is **on** by default) is
enabled.  But even making sure that `flex_bg` is off, resizing
the inodes fails.

The best way to do the conversion is then to:

1. backup filesystem
2. re-create filesystem
3. restore backup

  [wikipedia]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Year_2038_problem
  [ext4]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ext4
  [xfs]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XFS
  [vfat]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File_Allocation_Table


