---
title: Filesystem discard
date: "2024-11-09"
author: alex
---
Now with the prevalence of SSD's for storage, it is important
to make sure that the [DISCARD][discard] opeartion is used.  This
is specially true as this can increase the lifetime of your flash
storage by reducing the need to re-map blocks by simply marking
them as freed.

In Linux, because the flexibility of the block device infrastructure
it is very easy to layer different block device drivers to add
functionality.  The risk of doing that is that [Discard][discard]
capabilities can be left out accidentally.

To examine if [Discard][discard] is enabled accross the different
layers, you can use the command:

```bash
lsblk --discard
```

This will output something like:

```
NAME            DISC-ALN DISC-GRAN DISC-MAX DISC-ZERO
loop0                  0        4K       4G         0
sda                    0        4K       2G         0
└─crypt-pool           0        4K       2G         0
  └─pool-imglib        0        4K       2G         0
sdb                    0        0B       0B         0
├─sdb1                 0        0B       0B         0
└─sdb2                 0        0B       0B         0

```
Make sure that the values under column `DISC-GRAN` and `DISC-MAX` are non-zero.

Once you have identified that discard is properly configured you can
start discarding using these commands:

- Discard on demand, by simply running:
  ```
  fstrim --all
  ```
- Add the `discard` option to the mount command.  This is supported by several
  filesystems and will call [discard][discard] as files are deleted.
- Run `fstrim --all` on a cron job either weekly or monthly.

In addition, if you are going to delete a logical volume, you could do:

```
blkdiscard DEVICE
```

on the logical volume **before** running `lvremove` to discard the storage
associated to the logical volume.

As I mentioned earlier, it is important to make sure that all layers have discard
enabled.

- Low level disc drivers.  These should detect that the underlying drive is capable
  of using `discard` automatically.
- mdadm : supported and enabled by default. [(1)][ref1]
- dmcrypt - supported, defaults to **off** for security, requires explicity enabling. [(2)][ref3]
- lvm2 : suppored and enabled by default. [(3)][ref2]
- Filesystems:
  - ext3/ext4: supports discard mount option and fstrim
  - btrfs: supports discard mount option and fstrim
  - f2fs: supports discard mount option and fstrim
  - xfs: supports discard mount option and fstrim
  - jfs: supports discard mount option and fstrim
  - ntfs: supports discard mount option with the ntfs3 driver and fstrim
  - vfat: supports discard mount option and fstrim
- Xen VMs using block devices will automatically detect [discard][discard] and enable the interface
  for virtual drives.


  [discard]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trim_(computing)
  [ref1]: https://serverfault.com/questions/508459/implementing-linux-fstrim-on-ssd-with-software-md-raid
  [ref2]: https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/SSD#LVM
  [ref3]: https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Dm-crypt
  
