---
title: voidlinux virtualization
tags: alpine, boot, configuration, desktop, device, filesystem, linux, network, power, setup, storage
---

This recipe is for setting virtualization on a voidlinux desktop.

Use this [setup script](https://github.com/alejandroliu/0ink.net/blob/master/snippets/void-kvm/setup.sh) to set things up on void linux.

# Connecting to libvirtd

Note that `virsh` and `virt-manager` commands connect to different `libvirtd`
sessions by defauult.

`virsh` defaults to `qemu:///session` while `virt-manager` to `qemu:///system`.

It is better to use `qemu:///system` as `qemu:///session` does not seem to see
all available resources.

To force `virsh` to connect to the right session you can use commands such as:

```bash
virsh --connect qemu:///system net-list
virsh --connect qemu:///system pool-list
```

# Create network

Set-up a bridge for internal networking using `NetworkManager`.  See this [article](https://www.happyassassin.net/posts/2014/07/23/bridged-networking-for-libvirt-with-networkmanager-2014-fedora-21/)
for reference.

Go to `NetworkManager` menu and use the `Edit network connections` applet:

- add new bridge connection
- give a suitable name
- disable IPv4 and IPv6
- everything can be left as default.

# Import images

This needs to be done on CLI (as the GUI doesn't seem to allow this)

```bash
virsh --connect qemu:///system vol-create-as $pool $vol 32k --format $format
virsh --connect qemu:///system vol-upload $vol $file
```

For `format`, use `raw` for iso, `qcow2` for actual drives.

# Setup VM

Just create VM as normal.

`virt-manager` create Vm wizard

1. manual install
2. alpine linux
3. mem: depends
4. Create storage (4GB is enough)
5. name.  Customize configuration.  Network use NAT.
6. Add CDROM, make readonly and shareable
7. Add Network connected to internal bridge.
8. Add boot device.
9. Add shared filesystem:
  - driver: virtio-9p
  - source path: `/var/lib/libvirt/filesystems/shared`
  - target path: `/shared`

Prepare system

1. create filesystem
  - mkfs.vfat /dev/vda
  - apk add syslinux
  - syslinux /dev/vda
2. copy media
  - mount -t vfat /dev/vda /mnt
  - cp -av /media/cdrom/. /mnt
  - edit /mnt/boot/syslinux/syslinux.cfg
    add: dom0_mem=1024M
  - umount /mnt
3. remove cdrom
  - power off
  - remove cdrom
  - change boot options
4. re-start system
5. setup-alpine
  - enter fqdn
  - set interface eth0 to dhcp
6. Mount shared fs:
  - mount -t 9p -o trans=virtio /shared /shared
  - fstab
  - /sharepoint   /share    9p  trans=virtio,version=9p2000.L,rw    0   0


# Thin provisioning

Create an overlay file like so:

```bash
qemu-img create -b ubuntu-20.04-server-cloudimg-amd64-disk-kvm.img -F qcow2 -f qcow2 guest-1.qcow2
```


