---
title: organizing notes
date: 2015-06-11
---

# My Documents

DOCUMENTS

- Project Folder
  - old
  - YYYY
  - deliverables
  - clips?
- category folder
  - expenses? expense reports and digital receipts
  - regs - passwords, registrations, etc...
  - nice notes - thank you letters, etc.
- Personal folder
  - info or important
    health account data, friends contacts, etc
  - clips
  - writing - personal writing, notes, letter, drafts,
  - taxes <year>
  <year> folder
- logs
  - activity log
  - travel log


Naming convention:

<initials>-<month><day>-<type>.<ext>

- initials : author initials or source initials
- monthday : 2 digits each
- type : type of document


# TODO Lists

- Work
  - Outlook based
  - Tickler File
  - Must Do List
  - E-mail to TODO
- Personal
  - Google Tasks

# Weekly Review Steps

NOTE: Clean-up temp folders


* Collect loose paper notes and materials.  (business cards, receipts, etc. - put in in basket for processing)
* Get IN to zero
* Empty your head (write down any new projects, action items, etc.)
* Review Action lists (Mark off completed actions & review for reminders of further action steps to capture)
* Review Previous Calendar Data (review for remaining action items, reference information, etc.)
* Review Upcoming Calendar Data
* Review Waiting For List (Records appropriate actions for any needed follow-up & check off received items)
* Review Project and Larger Outcome lists (ensure that at least one kick-start action is in your system for each)
* Review Any relevant checklists
* Review Someday/Maybe List  (Check for any projects that may have become active and transfer them to "Projects" & delete items no longer of interest)
* Review "Pending" and Support Files  (Browse through all work-in-progress support material to trigger new actions, completions, and waiting-fors)

## Six Level Model for Reviewing Your Own Work

1. current actions
2. current projects
3. areas of responsibility
4. 1-2 year goals
5. 3-5 year vision
6. big picture view

* * *


* projects: clearly defined outcomes and the next
* actions to move them towards closure
* horizontal focus: reminders placed in a trusted system
* that is reviewed regularly
* vertical focus: informal back of the envelope planning


# Task Lists

- @ANYWHERE : Actions that can be done anywhere (rare?)
- @CALLS : Phonecalls
- @ERRANDS : Actions that I can do while going about
- @HOME : Actions that can only be done at home
- @HOME_PC : Actions that can be done at a PC (home PC?) about home.
- @REVIEW : Items for review. Should be only text. Attachments should go to
  my Dropbox folder.
- @WAITING_FOR : Tracker items that need to be follow-up later
- @WORK : Actions that can only be done at the office.
- @WORK_PC : Actions that can be done at a PC (work PC) about work.
- @AGENDAS : Notes on what to discuss with different people
- SOMEDAY_MAYBE : Idea parking lot

